Interceptors (#67432)
dotnet/roslyn: docs/features/interceptors.md

# Interceptors

## Summary
[summary]: #summary

> *Interceptors* are an experimental compiler feature. An *interceptor* is a method which can declaratively substitute a call to itself instead of a call to an *interceptable* method at compile time. This substitution occurs by having the interceptor declare the source locations of the calls that it intercepts. This provides a limited facility to change the semantics of existing code by adding new code to a compilation (e.g. in a source generator).

Reviewer: >substitute a call to itself instead of a call to an *interceptable* method [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=106&length=74)

Perhaps "substitute a call to an *interceptable* method with a call to itself"

```cs
using System;
using System.Runtime.CompilerServices;

var c = new C();

> c.InterceptableMethod(1); // (L1,C1): prints `interceptor 1`

Reviewer: >prints `interceptor 1` [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=38&length=22)

Minor: Should the messages be surrounded with `"` instead?

c.InterceptableMethod(1); // (L2,C2): prints `other interceptor 1`
c.InterceptableMethod(1); // prints `interceptable 1`

class C
{
    [Interceptable]
    public void InterceptableMethod(int param)
    {
        Console.WriteLine($"interceptable {param}");
    }
}

// generated code
static class D
{
    [InterceptsLocation("Program.cs", line: /*L1*/, character: /*C1*/)] // refers to the call at (L1, C1)

>     public static void InterceptorMethod(this C c, int param)

Reviewer 2: >public static void InterceptorMethod(this C c, int param) [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=4&length=57)

I think the interceptor should match the ref-ness of `this` parameter of the method it is intercepting.

    {
        Console.WriteLine($"interceptor {param}");
    }

    [InterceptsLocation("Program.cs", line: /*L2*/, character: /*C2*/)] // refers to the call at (L2, C2)
    public static void OtherInterceptorMethod(this C c, int param)
    {
        Console.WriteLine($"other interceptor {param}");
    }
}
```

## Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

### InterceptableAttribute

A method must indicate that its calls can be *intercepted* by including `[Interceptable]` on its declaration.

> If a call is intercepted to a method which lacks this attribute, a warning is reported. This may be changed to an error in the future.

Author: The call is still intercepted. I'll clarify that in the text.

This allows us to experiment with the scenarios we're interested in without having to annotate and rebuild the related libraries first.

We might make this an error before feature merge. It might depend on what our partners need from us in the short term.

}
```

### InterceptsLocationAttribute

A method indicates that it is an *interceptor* by adding one or more `[InterceptsLocation]` attributes. These attributes refer to the source locations of the calls it intercepts.

```cs
namespace System.Runtime.CompilerServices
{
    [AttributeUsage(AttributeTargets.Method, AllowMultiple = true)]
    public sealed class InterceptsLocationAttribute(string filePath, int line, int character) : Attribute
    {
    }
}
```

#### File paths

File paths used in `[InterceptsLocation]` must exactly match the paths on the syntax trees they refer to by ordinal comparison. `SyntaxTree.FilePath` has already applied `/pathmap` substitution, so the paths used in the attribute will be less environment-specific in many projects.

The compiler does not map `#line` directives when determining if an `[InterceptsLocation]` attribute intercepts a particular call in syntax.

#### Position
The implementation currently uses 0-indexed line and character numbers. However, we may want to change that before shipping it as an experimental feature to be 1-indexed, to match existing places where these values are displayed to the user (e.g. `Diagnostic.ToString`).

> The location of the call is the location of the name syntax which denotes the interceptable method. For example, in `app.MapGet(...)`, the name syntax for `MapGet` would be considered the location of the call. If we allow intercepting calls to property accessors in the future (e.g `obj.Property`), we would also be able to use the name syntax in this way.

Reviewer: >For example, in `app.MapGet(...)` [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=100&length=33)

Consider also including an example with a qualified name, such as `System.Console.WriteLine(...)`.

#### Attribute creation

The goal of the above decisions is to make it so that when source generators are filling in `[InterceptsLocation(...)]`, they simply need to read `nameSyntax.SyntaxTree.FilePath` and `nameSyntax.GetLineSpan().Span.Start` for the exact file path and position information they need to use.

We should provide samples of recommended coding patterns for generator authors, and perhaps provide public helper methods, which will make it relatively easy for them to do the right thing. For example, we could provide a helper on InvocationExpressionSyntax which returns the values that need to be put in `[InterceptsLocation]`.

### Non-invocation method usages

Conversion to delegate type, address-of, etc. usages of methods cannot be intercepted.

Interception can only occur for calls to ordinary member methods--not constructors, delegates, properties, local functions, etc.

### Arity

Interceptors cannot have type parameters or be declared in generic types at any level of nesting.

> ### Signature matching

Reviewer 2: Does interceptor have to be static?

The return and parameter types of the interceptable and interceptor methods must match exactly, except that:
- when an interceptable instance method is compared to a classic extension method, we use the extension method in reduced form for comparison, and
- reference types with oblivious nullability can match either annotated or unannotated reference types.

Arity does not need to match between intercepted and interceptor methods. In other words, it is permitted to intercept a generic method with a non-generic interceptor.

### Conflicting interceptors

If more than one interceptor refers to the same location, it is a compile-time error.

> If an `[InterceptsLocation]` attribute is found in the compilation which does not refer to the location of an interceptable method call, it is a compile-time error.

Reviewer: >it is a compile-time error [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=137&length=26)

In the `InterceptableAttribute` section, it sounds like this is a warning.

> If an `[InterceptsLocation]` attribute is found in the compilation which does not refer to the location of an interceptable method call, it is a compile-time error.

Reviewer: >[InterceptsLocation] [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=7&length=20)

Are the `[InterceptsLocation]` and `[Interceptable]` attributes dropped when emitting the methods to metadata?

Author: No. We could consider:
- having the compiler drop the attributes automatically (treating them as pseudo-custom attributes, perhaps)
- making the attribute declaration in the framework "conditional" on some debug symbol which is not usually provided.
- deliberately keeping them there. I can't think of any good reason to do this.

Perhaps the first option would be best.

Author: Adding a PROTOTYPE to the doc.

### Interceptor accessibility

> An interceptor can intercept a call at a given location even if the interceptor would not ordinarily be accessible at that location.

Author: It does.

The goal of this was to make it so interceptors wouldn't have to "pollute" the IntelliSense results if it's not intended for those interceptors to be called directly. Maybe there is a simpler way of achieving that.

Maybe including the interceptors in a separate namespace would help, but I'd still be concerned about the behavior of IDE features which show members from unimported namespaces, etc.

Perhaps we should drop this rule for now and revisit if we start encountering issues with "lookup pollution" in the IDE.

> An interceptor can intercept a call at a given location even if the interceptor would not ordinarily be accessible at that location.

Reviewer 2: > The goal of this was to make it so interceptors wouldn't have to "pollute" the IntelliSense results if it's not intended for those interceptors to be called directly. 

I think there is a Browsable attribute with "never" that should hide the APIs from IntelliSense.

> An interceptor can intercept a call at a given location even if the interceptor would not ordinarily be accessible at that location.

Author: Have updated the doc to note this.

We add the public API `public static InterceptableLocation? GetInterceptableLocation(this InvocationExpressionSyntax syntax)`. The API and the new return type are guarded by `[RequiresPreviewFeatures]`, requiring generators which use the APIs to opt-in. If the feature is significantly revised or withdrawn, use of `[RequiresPreviewFeatures]` gives us the latitude to make breaking changes to these public APIs or to remove them.

We should provide samples of recommended coding patterns for generator authors.

### Non-invocation method usages

Conversion to delegate type, address-of, etc. usages of methods cannot be intercepted.

Interception can only occur for calls to ordinary member methods--not constructors, delegates, properties, local functions, etc.

### Arity

Interceptors cannot have type parameters or be declared in generic types at any level of nesting.

### Signature matching

When a call is intercepted, the interceptor and interceptable methods must meet the signature matching requirements detailed below:

> - When an interceptable instance method is compared to a classic extension method, we use the extension method in reduced form for comparison. The extension method parameter with the 'this' modifier is compared to the instance method 'this' parameter.
> - The returns and parameters, including the 'this' parameter, must have the same ref kinds and types, except that reference types with oblivious nullability can match either annotated or unannotated reference types.
> - Method names and parameter names are not required to match.
> - Parameter default values are not required to match. When intercepting, default values on the interceptor method are ignored.
> - 'scoped' modifiers and `[UnscopedRefAttribute]` must be equivalent.

Reviewer: Was the use of `'` intentional around "this" and "scoped"? If not, perhaps:
```suggestion
- When an interceptable instance method is compared to a classic extension method, we use the extension method in reduced form for comparison. The extension method parameter with the `this` modifier is compared to the instance method `this` parameter.
- The returns and parameters, including the `this` parameter, must have the same ref kinds and types, except that reference types with oblivious nullability can match either annotated or unannotated reference types.
- Method names and parameter names are not required to match.
- Parameter default values are not required to match. When intercepting, default values on the interceptor method are ignored.
- `scoped` modifiers and `[UnscopedRefAttribute]` must be equivalent.
```

Arity does not need to match between intercepted and interceptor methods. In other words, it is permitted to intercept a generic method with a non-generic interceptor.

### Conflicting interceptors

If more than one interceptor refers to the same location, it is a compile-time error.

If an `[InterceptsLocation]` attribute is found in the compilation which does not refer to the location of an explicit method call, it is a compile-time error.

### Interceptor accessibility

> An interceptor must be accessible at the location where interception is occurring.

Reviewer 2: Where do we check that?

Author: Added a note to the doc. In a subsequent PR I'd like to address this as well as scoped differences.

- Method names and parameter names are not required to match.
- Parameter default values are not required to match. When intercepting, default values on the interceptor method are ignored.
- `scoped` modifiers and `[UnscopedRefAttribute]` must be equivalent.

Arity does not need to match between intercepted and interceptor methods. In other words, it is permitted to intercept a generic method with a non-generic interceptor.

### Conflicting interceptors

If more than one interceptor refers to the same location, it is a compile-time error.

If an `[InterceptsLocation]` attribute is found in the compilation which does not refer to the location of an explicit method call, it is a compile-time error.

### Interceptor accessibility

An interceptor must be accessible at the location where interception is occurring. PROTOTYPE(ic): This enforcement is not yet implemented.

We imagine it will be common to want to discourage explicit use of interceptor methods. For this use case, should consider adjusting behavior of `[EditorBrowsable]` to work in the same compilation, and encouraging generator authors to use it to prevent interceptors from appearing in lookup, etc.

> PROTOTYPE(ic): Generators often want to put things not intended to be user-visible in fire-local types. This reduces the need to defend against name conflicts with other types in the user's project. A file-local type is not present in lookup outside of the file it is declared in. But, the type is *accessible* from the runtime point of view presently. Should we permit interceptors declared in file types to refer to other files?

Reviewer: >fire-local [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=86&length=10)

file-local?

Author: ```suggestion
PROTOTYPE(ic): Generators often want to put things not intended to be user-visible in file-local types. This reduces the need to defend against name conflicts with other types in the user's project. A file-local type is not present in lookup outside of the file it is declared in. But, the type is *accessible* from the runtime point of view presently. Should we permit interceptors declared in file types to refer to other files?
```

    public static void InterceptorMethod(this C c, int param)
    {
        Console.WriteLine($"interceptor {param}");
    }

    [InterceptsLocation("Program.cs", line: /*L2*/, character: /*C2*/)] // refers to the call at (L2, C2)
    public static void OtherInterceptorMethod(this C c, int param)
    {
        Console.WriteLine($"other interceptor {param}");
    }
}
```

## Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

### InterceptableAttribute

A method must indicate that its calls can be *intercepted* by including `[Interceptable]` on its declaration.

If a call is intercepted to a method which lacks this attribute, a warning is reported, and interception still occurs. This may be changed to an error in the future.

```cs
namespace System.Runtime.CompilerServices
{
    [AttributeUsage(AttributeTargets.Method)]
    public sealed class InterceptableAttribute : Attribute { }
}
```

### InterceptsLocationAttribute

A method indicates that it is an *interceptor* by adding one or more `[InterceptsLocation]` attributes. These attributes refer to the source locations of the calls it intercepts.

```cs
namespace System.Runtime.CompilerServices
{

>     [AttributeUsage(AttributeTargets.Method, AllowMultiple = true)]

Reviewer 3: Spec: I think it's implied by this definition (allow multiple), but consider including an example with multiple interceptions/attributes on a single interceptor method.

    public sealed class InterceptsLocationAttribute(string filePath, int line, int character) : Attribute
    {
    }
}
```

PROTOTYPE(ic): open question in https://github.com/dotnet/roslyn/pull/67432#discussion_r1147822738

> Are the `[InterceptsLocation]` attributes dropped when emitting the methods to metadata?

Reviewer 3: Can `InterceptsLocationAttribute` appear on a PE symbol? I think in that case, it will not be honored (by design).
I'm not sure whether we should mention that in the spec, but it would be good to have a test for that scenario.

We should provide samples of recommended coding patterns for generator authors to show correct usage of these, including the "translation" from 0-indexed to 1-indexed positions.

### Non-invocation method usages

Conversion to delegate type, address-of, etc. usages of methods cannot be intercepted.

Interception can only occur for calls to ordinary member methods--not constructors, delegates, properties, local functions, etc.

### Arity

Interceptors cannot have type parameters or be declared in generic types at any level of nesting.

### Signature matching

When a call is intercepted, the interceptor and interceptable methods must meet the signature matching requirements detailed below:
- When an interceptable instance method is compared to a classic extension method, we use the extension method in reduced form for comparison. The extension method parameter with the `this` modifier is compared to the instance method `this` parameter.

> - The returns and parameters, including the `this` parameter, must have the same ref kinds and types, except that reference types with oblivious nullability can match either annotated or unannotated reference types.

Reviewer 3: Spec: I don't think nullability should be required to match. In most cases, nullability issues are treated as warnings only.

- Method names and parameter names are not required to match.

> - Parameter default values are not required to match. When intercepting, default values on the interceptor method are ignored.

Reviewer 3: nit: consider mentioning that `params` differences are also ignored.

- `scoped` modifiers and `[UnscopedRefAttribute]` must be equivalent.

> Arity does not need to match between intercepted and interceptor methods. In other words, it is permitted to intercept a generic method with a non-generic interceptor.

Author: Currently the interceptor can only have arity zero.

> Arity does not need to match between intercepted and interceptor methods. In other words, it is permitted to intercept a generic method with a non-generic interceptor.

Reviewer 3: Thanks for the clarification. It would be good to update the spec accordingly.

> Arity does not need to match between intercepted and interceptor methods. In other words, it is permitted to intercept a generic method with a non-generic interceptor.

Author: A previous section in this doc states:

> ### Arity
> 
> Interceptors cannot have type parameters or be declared in generic types at any level of nesting.

Was there any adjustment to this language or to the order of sections I should make to improve clarity?

> Arity does not need to match between intercepted and interceptor methods. In other words, it is permitted to intercept a generic method with a non-generic interceptor.

Reviewer 3: Great. I'd just missed it :-)
